Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Teresa Barron. She's assistant
professor at Nottingham University working on reproductive ethics and
philosophy of parenthood. And today we're going to talk
about her book, The Artificial W Womb on Trial.
So Doctor Barron, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone. Thanks very much for having me
here. So let's start perhaps with just a definition
here just also for people who might not be
familiar with it to understand what we're going to
talk about here. What is artificial womb technology?
Uh, WELL, so artificial womb technology in the way
that we might conceive it and the way that
it's been presented in science fiction doesn't exist yet.
This is the kind of pod that we might
imagine in which a human fetus grows outside of
the human womb, the biological womb. I, I say
human, but of course this could apply for any
mammal. What does exist at the moment is, uh,
uh, Sort of, uh, scientific research project into ways
in which we might support late stage, uh, fetuses.
Uh, FOR example, when a pregnancy gets into trouble
or when there's a maternal fetal conflict outside of
the womb, but we're talking about. Moving fetuses from
an established in utero pregnancy into a kind of
support system. So the kind of um brave new
world image of an artificial womb uh is not
on the radar yet, but it's something that of
course comes up a lot in the ethical literature
when we talk about the way in which this
kind of scientific work might progress.
But is this kind of technology being developed at
all? I mean, and if so, how, how developed
is it?
There are, um, OK, so maybe we need to
break this down into two strands of research that
are relevant to this. So artificial womb technology, when
you again, when we think about the the kind
of sci-fi concept and the idea that we might
one day be able to move procreation completely out
of the body and into uh independent scientific technologies.
That requires us to be able to, uh, implant
an embryo into some kind of artificial environment and
get it to start developing there. That's one sort
of end of the research spectrum there. And that's
something that currently we are able to implant or
we are able to maintain and develop human embryos
in artificial environments, but only up to a certain
time point. In most countries, that's 14 days, at
which point there is a legal cutoff. You cannot
do any further work there. So we have this
kind of very short stage in which we can
support the embryo outside the body at one end.
Uh, AND then at the other end, we have
different kinds of support technologies. Uh, YOU know, the,
the neonatal incubator could in some ways be seen
as something akin to an artificial womb, depending on
how we, we define that. But the more, uh,
kind of something we might more closely, uh, describe
as as artificial womb technology is something that is
being developed currently in 4 different countries. Around the
world, and this is a system that would allow
support of the developing fetus while maintaining fetal physiology
rather than the transition to breathing air and the
transition to neonatal physiology. So when we think of
a standard neonatal intensive care unit and the incubators
that are used to support premature babies when they're
born too soon and are very fragile and very
dependent. They are still, they are neonates, they have
switched over to breathing air and we are supporting
them in that physiology. So the kind of technologies
that I'm talking about that are being developed in
only a few projects around the world are technologies
that would allow the fetus to continue essentially gestationally
developing, but outside the body. So maintaining uh oxygenation
via fluid, um, and continuing to develop as if
it were in the womb. These are obviously incredibly
difficult and expensive research projects. Um, THERE are 2,
located in the US, one a joint project between
Japan and Australia, and one, currently being run in
the Netherlands. Uh, VERY costly, very difficult, and, um,
nowhere at the level ready for, um, human subject
trials yet. So the trials that are being currently
conducted with these technologies are being done using animal
fetuses, mostly sheep and goats, sometimes pigs, uh, but
nowhere humans just yet.
And what kinds of philosophical questions does do artificial
wombs raise?
Oh my goodness, so many, so many, uh, part
of the, the kind of philosophical conundrum, uh, focuses
on the actual research ethics of the science being
done now. So this is where my book really
focuses. Um, AND this is the kind of research
questions that we might apply not only to animal
trials, but also to potentially humans. TRIALS. How would
we, for example, ensure genuine morally transformative informed consent
from parents participating in this kind of trial? You
can just imagine that the only suitable candidates for
this kind of trial might be parents who have
just been informed that their pregnancy is at risk
of extremely premature birth. Uh, THAT'S a state of
we can imagine severe distress and, and, and fear
and confusion and uncertainty. Are we going to ask
them to enroll in a very experimental technological trial?
That's, that's one area. So we've got the kind
of the medical research ethics, but there are also
bigger philosophical questions that we might ask about artificial
womb technology in general that focus not just on
the research ethics of the science happening now and
you know, in the near future, but also. Focusing
on the longer term project of developing an artificial
womb that could genuinely remove procreation from the biological
body and from from this this whole process. And
some of those questions are, for example, more political
philosophy questions about uh the equality of men and
women. Would the artificial womb, for example, um, remove
the biological barrier to equality that uh some. Feminist
philosophers have have argued, you know, the artificial womb
is necessary for women's true liberation, or would this
be imposing essentially the male, uh, life form and
life cycle on everyone in a, you know, the
worst possible blow to equality for the sexes. So,
uh, that's another area of um. Of thinking that's
kind of being being developed around these questions. Another
one is, for example, the ethics of abortion. Uh,
SO some philosophers have raised the concern that if
we have the possibility to move any pregnancy into
an artificial womb, will that develop a slippery slope
from not just pregnancies that are in trouble, for
example, because of a maternal fetal conflict. I mean
we can imagine. Um, A pregnant woman who needs
chemotherapy, we could remove the fetus and allow it
to develop healthily and safely without being adversely affected
by by that process and you know, save, save
both organisms. Um, BUT would there be a slippery
slope from that kind of situation to a situation
in which any woman who wants to have an
abortion because she doesn't want to carry the pregnancy
at all? IS essentially forced to have that fetus
moved into an artificial womb. What would that do
for for paternity rights as well? Would men have
any kind of claim or rights or responsibility for
a fetus that develops in an artificial womb, regardless
of their their role in the kind of broader
decision making around that. So there's a lot of
very difficult, uh, very interesting, very difficult ethical and
political questions that come out of this territory. Um,
AND finally, there's, there's metaphysical questions we have to
ask ourselves, uh, questions about what it means to
create human life, well, any kind of life, but
most of the time we're interested in human life
in in this kind of field. Um, AT what
point do we, uh, think of an embryo, for
example, as a person, uh, the calls that have
been made to extend the 14 day limit that
I mentioned earlier on embryo research, uh, in vitro.
That brings up all these kind of questions about
at what point that embryo should be considered a
human subject. So at the moment embryos sit in
this very unique, uh, niche in research ethics and
regulation that's kind of been carved out for the
embryo. They're not, uh, human tissue, but they're also
not human subjects. They have a very special little.
Uh, NICHE that's been written for that purpose. But
at what point do we move them? And can
we just keep expanding that niche? Or at what
point do we have to see this as, um,
you know, the beginning of a person in a
way that might slide into human subject research ethics
regulation?
Right. Yeah, yeah, I understand. So what are the
strongest or what would you say are the strongest
moral, scientific, and political arguments for developing and using
artificial womb technology?
Uh, THERE, I think it really depends on what
kind of artificial womb technology we're looking at. So
we, we might want to focus just on the
kind of neonatal and fetal support technologies that are
currently being developed, um, in which case, I think
the very strong arguments are, are for developing those
technologies are the ones that are currently motivating that
research, you know, the ability to save the lives
of wanted, uh, babies when they are born very
premature. And this is a field in which medical
science has been advancing, uh, you know, leaps and
bounds over the last century. Essentially, you know, it
used to be that being born at 30 weeks
was a death sentence. Uh, BABIES can now survive
earlier and earlier and earlier. Um, AND of course
the push to develop these kinds of support systems
are not only aimed at saving the lives of
these very premature. FETUSES slash neonates, but also to
reduce morbidities because now we can save the lives
of often 22 or 23 week estimated gestational age
neonates if they're born very premature, but there is
a very high risk of quite severe morbidities if
you're born that premature. So developing this kind of
technology is motivated by I think very compelling drives
for, uh, not only reducing, uh, mortality, but also
morbidity. If we look at the kind of broader
question of whether we should be trying to move
from that ground from that foundation and to develop
artificial wombs in the more kind of brave new
world, uh, Huxley sense where we could just outsource
procreation entirely to machines. I think there are there
are some arguments that maybe are more compelling and
some that I find incredibly uncompelling. So, uh, so
for example, some of the arguments that have been
put forward about, for example, the need for artificial
technology to liberate, uh, female body people, uh, from,
uh, sex inequality. I find, uh, very unconvincing, partly
for the reason that. When we look at sex
inequality, this is a global phenomenon. Um, WE can
just we can very easily imagine that if artificial
womb technology were developed, uh, rolled out safely for
for use by, uh, by citizens of whichever country
got to it first, this would only be accessible
to the very well off, uh, those with the
resources to to utilize that technology. This is not
something that would. Lift, uh, the entire, uh, female
half of the population of the world out of,
uh, sex-based inequality overnight. It's something that most, most
people, probably 99% of uh of people would never
have access to, um, at least not in any
kind of foreseeable future. The other problem is that
of course, Unless you couple the rollout of artificial
womb technology with sterilization of the entire population, there
will still be pregnancies. There will still be people
who, whether deliberately or unintentionally get pregnant and having
artificial wombs available doesn't prevent that, uh, that kind
of issue. So we still have the the the
looming specter of um. Pregnancy based or childbirth based
discrimination. Um, AND so I I find this kind
of idea that the artificial womb will free us
all from this kind of discrimination, this kind of
inequality, the burdens involved in childbirth, um, and early
child rearing and so on, very unconvincing.
Uh, AND on the other hand, what kinds of
adverse outcomes have people been warning about and what
are the strongest arguments against developing this kind of
technology?
Um, I think there's a few different ways in
which people have gone and kind of warning against
developing this technology. One of those I think is
a fear about, uh, commodification more broadly. So a
fear that if we remove the, uh, biological process
or remove that process from our own bodies, procreation
becomes so detached that people think of children in
a in a in a new way that we
might not be prepared for. Um, AND that. You
know that that fear has been expressed in various
different ways, uh, from the kind of lower we
might say lower level of fear that people will
not bond with their children uh in the same
way. I'm not very convinced by that argument because
of course we know that stepparents, foster parents, adoptive
parents, um, many parents develop incredibly loving and and
close relationships with their children without any kind of
biological bond, whether that's gestational or genetic. Other kinds
of fears that I think are potentially more, uh,
legitimate concerns that have been expressed are the ideas
that, um, as we've seen in some surrogacy cases,
for example, cases in which, uh, Commissioning parents have
changed their minds about wanting the child halfway through
a surrogate's pregnancy has been completed. There's been a
couple of high profile, quite scandalous cases, um, in
the last decade or so that have shown this
this sort of attitude, um, which of course, you
know, is not widespread, but uh it's the kind
of thing that especially if it gets. Into enough
newspapers, people will will worry about people might worry
that the same kind of of consequence could arise
with artificial womb technology that, you know, you could
put your order in, uh, for your artificially gestated
baby and somewhere in the process of gestation, go,
ah, you know what, actually, we've changed our minds
about this. Um These fears and these debates are
often rolled into uh or rolled up with artificial
womb technology and also, uh, other ethical debates about,
for example, uh, prenatal genetic diagnosis, um, the idea
that we might and and also separately, the idea
that we might at some point be able to
create designer babies by modifying the germline. Different, uh,
different issues, but that end up packaged up together
in this broader fear around what might happen if
we let procreation get too technical and too personalizable.
Um, SO I think this is this is definitely
a uh a larger category of ethical debate that
I think is is more legitimate to be concerned
about than the idea that if we don't gestate
our babies personally, we won't love them.
And that would be a form of eugenics, correct.
So the, the worry about eugenic motivations is one
that definitely comes up a lot in these uh
arguments about, um, not just artificial womb technology, but
things like CRISPR and the possibility that of course,
at the minute, uh, again, the scientific research is
focusing on, uh, for example, eradicating. Uh, SPECIFIC heritable
diseases, but people look at that and go, oh,
but what if one day we can use that
technology to choose our babies eye colors, IQ, uh,
sporting, uh, ambitions and abilities. Uh, OF course, when
you can select for that kind of thing, the,
the, the word eugenics comes up immediately.
Yeah, because I would imagine that if we were
trying to eliminate something like cystic fibrosis, probably not
many people would oppose it, but when we get
into the realm of trying to improve or Increase
IQ and selecting for particular kinds of physical traits,
that's more controversial,
right? Absolutely. And of course we are nowhere near.
I keep saying we as if I am a
scientist. The the brilliant scientific teams that are working
on these uh different lines of research are nowhere
near the the stage at which you would be
able to select your baby's IQ, uh, even if
I'm not sure that's even a genetically linked trait,
maybe it is, but um we're we're nowhere near
that stage in the same way that we are
nowhere near the stage of having. Um, YOU know,
full, um, complete ectogenesis in the sense we could
have artificial wombs that gestate from embryo to to
full term. That's just not anywhere near us on
the horizon. But something that we do need to
consider is that medical ethics is not always completely
ahead of scientific innovation. So it is important to
have these debates and to to to think where
might we translate this into policy into regulation. As
far ahead as we can, um, as long as
we're not, you know. Sliding down into uh into
insane hypotheticals that may or may not be divorced
from the scientific reality.
Of course. So in the book you talk about
the convergence argument. What is it and how does
it suggest that we avoid some of the ethical
problems associated with the development of complete ectogenesis?
Yeah, thank you. Um, THIS is. Uh, THE convergence
argument is the general name I've given to a
shape of argument that comes up. I think I
found it at least 6 times in different. Bioethical
works, uh, from the 80s to, you know, last
year, uh, that focus on how we might get
around some of the ethical conundru, the, the ethical
sticking points that would be presented by trying to
develop an artificial womb from scratch. So imagine that
you've got your your artificial womb prototype, you want
to test this with human subjects. The only way
to do that. Uh, AND the only way to
kind of see that it works or find out
what doesn't work and develop it further would be
to insert a human embryo and try and gestate
that as long as possible, ideally to full term,
uh, to show that it works. The problem with
this, uh, that most ethicists see immediately is that
this, this would involve. Producing, uh, people for the
purposes of scientific experimentation and and also knowing that
because we almost never get it right the first
time, we would be developing, uh, developing people in
the knowledge that their outcomes would not be as
good as if they had been gestated in in
a in a biological womb. Um, So that's the
kind of the the sticky point. We can't make
people, um, just for the instrumentally to show that
our science either works or doesn't work. So how
can we avoid that? Well, uh, these different bioethicists
have In different forms, uh, but mostly kind of
dancing to the same tune, argued that we can
avoid this by converging two branches of independently justifiable
scientific research. So we can take our, our work,
uh, in which we Maintain human embryos, uh, and
I guess eventually if that 14 day limit were
to be extended early fetuses outside the womb, um,
and just keep increasing that length of time in
which we in which we maintain them outside the
biological womb. And at the same time at the
other end of of gestation, work back the age
at which we can support an extremely premature fetus
uh from an existing pregnancy. Outside the womb. So
basically intervening in that procreative process, uh. Later and
later from one end and earlier and earlier from
the other end. And the idea would be that
at some point they will just naturally converge. Uh,
AND we can use that overlap, um, to essentially
go, oh, well, look, we have accidentally created an
artificial womb that can get you from embryo to
full term baby. And we never had to go
through this messy process of instrumentally creating people for
the purposes of research. Um, THE problem with this
convergence argument is that, well, actually there's a few
problems with it, um, as I explain in the
book, but one of the biggest problems is that
it does not account for the fact that this
overlap. Is itself, uh, representing a research process. So
the idea that we could, you know, develop an
embryo outside the womb up to this point and
that we could intervene to rescue a late, uh,
late stage mid-stage fetus from this point, uh, into
our, uh, support system. Transitioning from one to the
other would itself be experimental. So we don't actually
eradicate, uh, new experimental research by having this kind
of convergence because getting from one to the other
would still be experimental. You would still be placing,
uh, that embryo or that fetus. In a certain
kind of risky situation, in order to see that
it works. We don't have the same kind of
moral justification for taking that leap that we do
when there is a fetus in an existing pregnancy.
To whose interests we can appeal in using experimental
or innovative procedures. We can go, look, it is
in the fetus' interests to survive, and of course
in the parents' interests to save their baby, um,
when it's a wanted pregnancy. So we can appeal
to an existing set of interests. But when we're
just bringing that embryo or fetus into existence as
part of a scientific procedure, that there is no
preexisting person to whose interests we can appeal to
justify the risks that we impose. Um, BECAUSE of
course, these are not, uh, research subjects who can
consent. If you bring someone into existence through, uh,
experimental ectogenesis, you can't ask them beforehand if they
consent to the risks that that might involve.
So tell us about the proof of principle trials
using mid to late gestational stage animal fetuses that
have been carried out in different countries. I mean,
how are they done and what results have people
been getting?
Yeah, um, so these are trials that have been
carried out, uh, mostly in, um, in the US
and, uh, in the project that's being run between
Australia and Japan. Um, AND again, mostly using fetal
sheep and goats. There have been a few trials
using, um, miniature pigs. The key facts, I guess
to lay out about these trials is that they,
uh, involve taking a fetal animal from, uh, a
pregnant sheep or goat, uh, or pig and moving
that fetal animal into, um, the, uh, ecto gestational
support system. And this is a system that maintains,
uh, oxygenation via the lungs, so preventing the animal
from starting to breathe. Um, AND seeing whether basically
whether that animal can survive, whether, uh, the fetal
animal survives inside that system. That's one crucial element.
Seeing whether it can survive being removed from that
system, that's another crucial element, and seeing whether gestation
within that kind of artificial environment has any, uh,
substantial adverse effects on, uh, brain development, for example,
or organ development. And this is a uh. An
area of research that is Gosh, nearly 70 years
old now, and some of the early trials done
in, in uh, in the 50s and 60s in
this area are uh interesting but shocking to read.
You look at that and go, man, there was
just no research ethics then at all. Uh, PEOPLE
could just do whatever they wanted. Now, of course,
there is a much tightly, a much more tightly
regulated research ethics process. Um, AND, and of course,
uh, much, much more robust peer review system. But,
but I want to emphasize this is a long
running. Uh, RESEARCH field Um, and The last decade
has, I think, seen the most promising results in
that area. So there are, uh, you know, trials
which have demonstrated that fetal animals can be kept
alive and kept kind of gestationally developing in these
artificial environments, uh, for days or even weeks, um,
and that they can be weaned from the artificial
environment to standard, um, sort of neonatal incubation, um,
without. Too many adverse effects, but there has to
be a caveat, it's important to know that fetal
animals, uh, that are being used in these trials.
Uh You know, they they might be representative of
human fetuses in in certain ways that makes the
science worth doing. Of course, there have to be
some similarities, but they are very different from human
fetuses of the relevant gestational age in many ways.
And one of the key ways in which they
are different is that they are bigger at the
the kind of relative gestational age that we're looking
at. A fetal sheep is bigger, it has, it
has greater mass, its arteries are wider and therefore
easier to cannulate. So the question of, oh, well,
you know, the animal trials worked, great, we can
switch over to human trials is it's absolutely not
that straightforward. There is a much more difficult trans
translation process from human trials to uh from animal
trials to human trials than we might expect.
Has complete ectogenesis already been achieved?
Uh, NOT in the way that we might think.
Um, NOW, complete ectogenesis is what I was describing
earlier, where we go from embryo to full term,
or at least, you know, as near to full
term as we can get all outside the body.
Um, WE cannot do that with humans. We cannot
do that with large mammals. We have gotten relatively
close to doing that with, uh, some. Uh, SOME
other species. Um, SO I say relatively close, of
course, uh, I don't mean that we can actually
genuinely, uh, gestate, uh, an animal from embryo to
full term. But, um, we, the, there have been,
uh, trials done using, for example, embryonic and fetal
mice that really push the boundary of, of the,
the limit of how long we can maintain an
organism, uh, in kind of gestational development outside the
body. Um, AND you know, even with mice, we're
not off the top of my head, we're not
even looking at halfway through full term development, but
the fact that we can. Create synthetic environments in
which an embryo, uh, and early stage fetus can
begin to develop and we can begin to see
early organogenesis, um, is incredibly impressive and of course
very useful for scientists to be able to do.
But the kind of broader question of can we
go from, uh, embryo to baby, uh, we can't
do that in any mammalian species yet. It's something
that birds and lizards have been doing for millennia,
though, uh, you know, we have outside of the
body development in many, many non-mammalian species. And, um,
you know, this is something that When we look
at the very earliest descriptions of, uh, ideas of
ectogenesis, uh, you know, going back even hundreds or
thousands of years when, when, um, people were pondering
this question of whether, whether we could develop outside
the body, they're taking their inspiration from, from other
species that developing in eggs outside the body. Mhm.
Uh, HAS it been tried with human fetuses?
No, uh, there are two teams, um, off the
top of my head that are getting ready to
launch human subject trials, but they have not yet
had approval. So, um, the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
um, if I remember correctly, applied for FDA approval.
Um, THE year before last, um, to launch human
subject trials, they have not had that approval yet,
but it's not been a straight up rejection. It's
been a please go away and think about these,
these other things. We're not completely convinced, but you
know, come back, come back. Um, IT'S something that
I think we can imagine seeing in the next
5 to 10 years. Uh, WHETHER we will be
ready for that is a different thing. I think
that one of the key issues. For this field
and actually a lot of fields of, um, medical
research, biomedical research is when you have a small
number of teams across the world working on one
thing, uh, and sort of racing to be the
ones who do it first. Um, IT is easy
to imagine that there are conflicts of interest involved.
Um, EVERYONE wants a Nobel Prize. So I, you
know, when I say we might see this in
the next 5 to 10 years, I don't mean
that necessarily as a good thing. I think there
is a risk, and this is something that I'm
working on in in my, uh, ethical writing. Uh
THERE is a risk that we push or that
these research teams push a little too fast, too
soon. Not just out of the kind of scientific
motivation, but because they are racing each other, you
know, when when you have so few uh scientific
teams working on the same thing, I imagine actually,
if there's even more scientific teams, it might still
feel like a race, but there are further um
incentives that might color that picture.
What practical and ethical questions does it raise? I
mean to try to do it with human fetuses.
There's quite a few different ones. One of them
is the one that I mentioned before about informed
consent. This is something that is absolutely fundamental to
medical research, um, and experimental medicine to, um, separate
fields. Um, BUT they both require a very high
kind of standards of informed consent. The question is
whether parents who were asked to enroll their fetuses
in these kind of trials would have the capacity
to give that informed consent, given the circumstances under
which they might be presented with the option to
enroll in this kind of trial. Um, AND the
other is whether they would be able to give
kind of informed consent, like even if they were
not in this situation of, of, um, fear, distress
and uncertainty when you just find out that your,
your pregnancy is at risk of extreme, extremely premature
birth. You might think, all right, well, even if
they aren't feeling distressed and and and afraid. Would
parents in those situations be able to understand any
kind of Robust level, what the distinction is between
the experimental option and the existing neonatal incubation option,
um, that would allow them to make an informed
decision. How would these options be presented? Um, IS
are there again vested interests that would encourage, for
example, the promotion of one option over another. Um,
THESE are all things that would have to be
handled incredibly difficult, uh, um, incredibly carefully. Um, THEY
would be difficult. They would require a lot of
independent scrutiny to make sure that those processes are
as as ethical as possible. And that's something that
of course comes up in in all kinds of
medical research. But I think here, um, you know,
we're talking about decisions having to be made very
fast, um, and in a in the face of
distress and extreme uncertainty. So I think that's 11
ethical issue. Another is, uh, as I kind of
follow on from what I was saying before about
animal trials, knowing when to translate from animal subject
trials to human soldier trials. At what point can
we say that we have enough evidence that this
would be a viable option in order for us
to present parents with uh. Eo gestation as an
option for treatment for an extremely premature baby, we
would have to have enough evidence that this is
at least as good an option in terms of
the likely outcomes for the baby. Um, AS the
existing treatment, which would be in, uh, the neonatal
intensive care unit. But how can we have the
question is how do we get that kind of
evidence from the animal trials? Um, SO there are,
there are a lot of very difficult problems to
be untangled here and some of them. The ethics
and the science are are really intertwined. We can't
necessarily know what the ethical solution is without knowing
what the scientific data show us, which is why
I think in this area, as with many areas
of medical ethics, it's really crucial for ethicists engaging
with these questions to be as well versed with
the science as possible.
Mhm. How does partial ectogenesis differ from complete ectogenesis
in terms of how it is approached philosophically?
One of the key things I think is this
question of interests. So when we look at partial
electiogenesis, um, at the kind of late end of
pregnancy, um, or at the early of the sorry,
the early stage of development, we have two very,
very different, uh, Notions of interests, uh, to deal
with. When we look at an embryo that is
going to be used for research and maintained in
vitro, and then disposed of after 14 days, there
is no human person there whose interests we have
to take into consideration from this kind of ethical
standpoint. Legally speaking, the embryo is not a person.
And because we know that it is not going
to become a person, because it will have to
be destroyed at 14 days, uh, it cannot be
developed further outside the body. We also know that
it's not a future person. So there's there's there's
no person and no future person. If there was
a future person, then there would be the interests
of that future person's interest, uh, interests of that
future person to take into account. But there's no
interests involved there that are morally relevant to that
conversation, at least in the framework that we're using
at the moment for that kind of research. At
the other end, there is an existing fetus, there
is an existing, um, pregnant woman. At least two
sets of interests that we can weigh into that
moral calculus of, you know, uh, would intervention X
be justified? Would intervention Y be justified? Um, WHAT
is in the interests of these people? Now, complete
ectogenesis. So this idea that you would, you know,
do the entire thing in an artificial environment. Is
A kind of an interesting metaphysical and ethical conundrum,
because at the beginning, there is no person and
of course at the end, there is a person.
That's something that we're very used to dealing with
in the ethics of pregnancy. But of course, with
the artificial environment, it all looks a little bit
different. At what point do you start to see
this as a process that you have to kind
of leave running? At what point can you make
interventions in the interests of that future person? At
what point should you say, oh, well, You know
what, this seems to be developing a bit weirdly.
Let's terminate the process now. I don't think that
we can completely straightforwardly translate abortion ethics onto that
kind of debate, especially when we're still in the
realm of research. Um, BUT I also don't have
a uh a framework in mind for what we
should use, uh, in order to answer those kind
of questions when it comes to complete ectogenesis.
How does this technology, artificial womb technology, compare to
the development of technologies such as in vitro fertilization
and mitochondrial DNA transfer?
So, yeah, uh, in some ways, they overlap entirely
in terms of the metaphysical questions that they require
us to to ask and answer. In some ways,
um, they're incredibly divergent, especially if we just focus
on partial ecto gestation and the the kind of
Research currently being done to try and support extremely
premature babies. I think that that is entirely removed
from the metaphysical and ethical questions that the development
of IVF and MTDNA donation call up. But the
idea of complete ectogenesis, and also any part of
that research process that would require us to, uh,
maintain embryos in vitro for a longer and longer
period of time. I think definitely call back some
of the questions that were asked about IVF during
the early days of that research, um, and that
have been raised again more recently with the development
of mitochondrial DNA donation. And that is the question
that we were talking about a little while ago,
which is, um, At what point can you create
someone for the purposes of research? Um, AT what
point can you create a human person in order
to show that you can. And when we look
at the, uh, the early development of IVF, of
course, this is not how, how this was framed
by the scientists doing this. They were not creating
people to show that they could. They were creating
people to allow people to have babies, to, you
know, to help with it was very strongly motivated.
At least on some level, by the belief that
it already was working, that they could do it
with animal embryos and that it would work with
human embryos. And so I'm sure that it wasn't
motivated in this kind of very instrumental way. But
in some ways, that is what it was, the
very early attempts to, uh, create, uh, IVF, uh,
babies. We research projects and these, these, the, uh,
embryos that didn't survive were negative outcomes. The children
that were born were positive outcomes. All of this.
WAS instrumental to showing that the research did work.
And I do think that we look at this
now and go, well, it's amazing. People benefit so
much from IVF. This was a fantastic breakthrough. I
think we would look at it very differently if
it had not worked. But the way in which
people were enrolled in these trials, uh, and the
the the efforts that went in, especially with things
like, um, egg harvesting, which, you know, even today
is not a pleasant process, but, uh, in those
early days could have really, uh, quite severe mental
and physical health consequences for for women who did
it. If if IVF had not been a scientific
success. But had failed, I think we would judge
those scientists through a very different lens. And I
think it's important to kind of be able to
look at that independently of the actual success. Um
So yeah, I think I think it's obviously we
don't I I think there is a part of
us that doesn't want to retrospectively. Find, uh, flaws
in our scientific history and go, oh, well, actually,
maybe it wasn't such a great thing. But I
think the possibility that we might retrospectively judge a
process or a discovery, um, in a negative light
shouldn't stop us from applying that kind of critical
scrutiny. Um, AND especially, you know, in comparison. Um,
WITH the kind of processes that we're looking at
now. Uh, I think it's something that I find,
uh, really quite shocking every time I, I think
about it is that one of the, uh, one
of the pioneers of IVF, um, wrote in a
journal article only 8 years, I think before the
birth of Louise Brown, um, that, uh, there's the
animal, uh, experiments had been a success, but that
it would, of course, be unethical. Uh, TO implant,
uh, a human embryo, uh, in a human womb,
following the same process. So clearly, clearly, he rethought
the ethics of it. But we have to ask,
did he rethink the ethics of it because he
rethought the ethics of it, or because the science
started to look like it could work? Um, I
think those are two separate questions. Right,
but do you think that there are circumstances under
which it may be ethically permissible to bring children
into the world for the purposes of research?
Personally, I, I don't. Uh, I, I, I've thought
about this a lot, um, particularly in the process
of writing this book. And I, I struggle more
and more, uh, to justify ethically the idea of,
of bringing someone into the world to show that
a specific scientific procedure works. Um. And I know
that that sort of has quite stark ramifications, uh,
for a lot of reproductive technologies, a lot of
reproductive science. Um, BUT The the kind of core
ethical principle um of treating people as ends in
themselves rather than as means to ends. I think
is completely incompatible with treating, uh, human subjects, uh,
including, I guess in this case, hypothetical human subjects.
As a means to showing that a research process
works. I think one attempt to overcome this problem
that uh has been has been made is the
distinction between, um, biomedical research and innovative medicine, which
are treated quite differently and have different kind of
justificatory frameworks attached. But I still I I I
have this moral instinct, I suppose that. Bringing someone
into the world to show you can is one
of the worst possible justifications for bringing someone into
the world. And that's within the context of a
broader, uh, philosophy that we already bring children into
the world far too lightly and that many of
the reasons that we do, uh, are not good
reasons.
And I mean, what would be the purpose and
goals of doing so?
Of bringing children into the world,
into the world for the purposes of uh experiment
or research. Yeah,
I mean, one of those reasons is that is
part of the scientific process. So in the case
of whether we look at IVF or whether we
look at, you know, hypothetically at some point in
the future, complete ectogenesis, in order to perfect a
technological innovation or a new procedure, you have to
run experiments, you have to find the The problems,
uh, by trying to do the thing that you're
trying to do, realizing what does and doesn't work,
and, and kind of tweaking it until until it's
perfect, until it works. Um, THE only way that
you can apply that kind of process in reproductive
technologies where the goal is to create a person
is to try and create people. Um, AND in
with some technologies, there's a lower risk involved that
that might end up having negative consequences for the
person created in that way. With others, I think
the risks involved are much starker, especially in cases
where we may not be able to intervene until
it's quote unquote, too late.
Yeah. And in whose interests would such an experiment
be conducted?
Most of the time when we look at things
like the development of IVF, uh, the development of,
uh, mitochondrial DNA donation, and in some ways of
framing the development of complete ectogenesis, the interests most
commonly referred to are those of prospective parents. So
those who really want to have genetically related children,
um. Under specific kinds of conditions. So mitochondrial DNA
donation is a great example of this because this
is something that Is often described as uh facilitating
um or or preventing the uh. The birth of
children with severe mitochondrial disease. But of course, we
already have ways of preventing that. We have ways
of screening embryos to check for these things. We
also have, you know, in cases where a woman
is a carrier for a mitochondrial disease, we, we
cannot use donor eggs. But the thing is that
the donor egg procedure won't allow her to have
her genetically related child. So MTDNA donation is a
procedure that has been developed, not Exclusively to prevent
children from being born with mitochondrial disease, but more
specifically to allow parents to have genetically related children
and avoid passing down these diseases. So there are
there are kind of more layers of motivation built
in than we often admit. Um, AND I think
part of The the role of ethics in this
area is to scrutinize all all of those levels
of motivation and to go, but why is it
so important that you have a genetically related child?
Why is that genetic link worth, for example, this
risk, this risk, this massive resource, uh, used in
in developing these, these technologies. These are, you know,
potentially quite uncomfortable questions, but they're ones that ethicists
definitely have to dig into.
OK, so I, I mean, I have just, uh,
an, uh, a last broad question, let's say. I
mean, uh, does, do you think that thinking about
the development of artificial womb technology also raises broader
questions or at least would connect to broader questions
in the ethics of procreation, like, for example, what
does it mean to bring a new being into
the world? What does it mean to decide to
perform an Act of procreation, uh, what does it
mean to make the decision that life is worth
living on behalf of a person who cannot be
consulted? I mean, because, uh, I, I've had, uh,
people, for example, anti-atalists on the show, and I
was just thinking that, um, they would probably use
this kind of technology to also. Put forth these
kinds of questions. I mean, to what extent it
is ethical even for people to procreate.
Yeah. Yeah, it's a big question. But it's a
question that I think this, the, the kind of
the generation, uh, who are currently in their kind
of late 20s, early 30s, um, are now having
to ask themselves in a genuine way for possibly
the first time as a whole generation. Because the
option not to procreate, uh, has is relatively speaking
so new. You know, of course, we've had contraceptives
that have been relatively reliable for a few generations
now. But I think we finally reached a point
where the acceptance of the decision not to have
children is widespread and well grounded enough that this
is now a genuine option. People are having to
decide. Not just kind of, oh, when, when will
I have children with whom will I have children?
But am I going to have children? Do I
want to have children? Why do I want to
have children? I think this is the first time
that um an entire cohort in society is faced
with that as a as a very real choice.
Um, AND something that therefore has to be dealt
with on not just kind of personal levels, but
but moral levels, social, political, economical levels. Um. This
is, I think, a turning point in the way
in which we we think about procreation. And of
course, you know, as you mentioned antenatalism, um, uh,
there have been, there have been antenatalists, there have
been, uh, philosophers who have critically questioned, um, whether
and why we should procreate. But I think that
is different from the phenomenon that we're currently seeing
where suddenly such a vast swathe of society is
opening themselves up to this question, uh, in a
very real sense. And it and we are seeing
the effect that it's having on, uh, for example,
birth rates in most developed countries.
Yeah, and I mean, I guess that from an
ethical perspective it's not good enough for people to
just justify procreating by saying something like, oh, it's
what everyone does, it's what we've evolved to do.
Uh, AND I mean, it's just that people have
this impulse to procreate or this impulse to have
sex that then results in procreation. I mean that
those kinds of justifications are not good enough for
ethics,
right. Yes, I think you you you you've hit
the nail on the head there. And the instinct.
I'm glad you brought up instinct because this is
something that comes up. I think exclusively when it
comes to uh procreation, that the the instinct, um,
is brought up as as a justification in a
way that is exclusive to parenthood, and that we
wouldn't accept as a justification for any other kind
of action. You know, if if if I say
If I, if I get in a fight on
the street and the police officer says, why did
you hit that man? I go, well, I just
had the instinct. That's not taken as a justification
or an excuse. But people raise quite genuinely this,
this, particularly when it comes to scrutinizing women's choices
to either have or not have children. This this
specter of the maternal instinct. You know, you, you,
you say you don't want children, but you'll change
your mind when that maternal instinct hits. You kind
of think if someone has very kind of in
a considered and rational way, looked at her, her
life choices and her her her career, her family
situation, her friends, her hobbies and gone. Yes, I
think I will not have a child. To say
to that person, oh, well, all those rational thoughts
won't matter when this instinct arrives. You kind of
think, well, that's that's kind of ridiculous. Why would
we want to be the kind of people who
will be swayed by an animal instinct in the
face of decisions we've made quite rationally. So I
think the instinct thing is I I could talk
about that all day. Um, WE, we, we treat
that in a very special way when it comes
to procreation.
Yeah, oh yeah, and I, I mean, I would
really love to get more into that. Perhaps we
can do another interview just about that, but it
falls outside of the purview of this one and
the, and your book. So, uh, the book is
again the Artificial womb on Trial, and I, of
course, will be leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Doctor Barron, just
before we go, apart from the book, where can
people find you on the internet?
Uh, I have a, um, Phil people account. Uh,
MY website is TeresaBaron.co.uk. You can find, uh, info
about my publications and my current research projects on
there. Um, AND you can find me on the
University of Nottingham's web pages.
Great. I will also be leaving links to that
in the description. And thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a fascinating conversation.
Thank you. Yeah, it's been a great chat.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.